Sensitivity of MHD models of Earth's magnetosphere to preconditioning

Abstract

We consider a set of validation experiments to determine the dependence of the length of initialization time on the predictions of  magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) models of Earth's magnetosphere. The experiment uses the Community Coordinated Modeling Center (CCMC) research tool, which allows runs of these models to be executed based on user-specified up-stream solar wind conditions, dipole tilt, and a model of ionospheric conductivity.  Three MHD implementations are considered; For each implementation, runs with reversals of $B_z$ in the GSM (Geocentric Solar Magnetospheric) coordinate system from +3.0~nT to -3.0~nT at 30 minutes, 90 minutes, and 210 minutes were executed.  All other solar wind conditions were set to be constant and equal to their long-term averages.  The dipole tilt was chosen to be zero throughout the run, and the ionospheric conductivity model was set to be ???.  We find and document significant differences in the predictions of models when the only parameter varied is the amout of time each was initialized: (1) ?; (2) ?; and (3) ?.  These results have implications in uncertainty estimates when a MHD models are used for interpretation and forecasting.

Introduction

Although short-time predictive validation experiments have been performed [REFS], and a significant amount of reseach has used MHD models for interpretation of and comparison with in-situ measurements [REFS], little literature exists on basic validation experiments that can provide uncertainty estimates MHD model predictions.  In this work, we peform internal validation tests on MHD models [Sargent, 2004].  

MHD models are typically initialized by starting with a cold tenuous uniform plasma (Raeder 2003) with a mirror dipole placed sunward of Earth to create a surface with $B_x=0$.  Then, the field on the sunward side is replaced with the actual solar wind conditions.  Raeder 2003 (in Buchner et al. 2003) noted that because the magnetosphere can have a long memory of previous conditions, the amount of time for which the simulation is executed with the initial actual solar wind conditions should be at least several hours.

Lavraud et al., 2006

Juusola et al. 2013

The motivation is to discover how sensitive MHD models are to the amount of time that they are preconditioned.

Experimental Set-Up

Results

